Source:[21]

Its a industrial technology and equipment provider for world's first commercial thorium reactor called Prototype Fast Breeder Reactor.[22]
Its R&D breakthroughs include 100 KW permanent magnet motors for India's submarine programme, which significantly reduce the size of the submarines for greater mobility.
The insulated-gate bipolar transistor-based inverter for railway locomotives. This propulsion system, which allows locomotives to use power more efficiently, helped BHEL bag a Rs 400 crore order from the Indian Railways, beating international rivals.
its R&D developed the high temperature superconducting (HTSC) transformer, which is more efficient, smaller in size, weight and volume, and can withstand twice the capacity overload without insulation damage or loss of product life.
In 2011, World's first 1200 kV Ultra High Voltage Alternating Current (UHVAC) Transformer of 333 MVA rating.The Transformer has been developed, manufactured and successfully tested by BHEL entirely through in-house know-how.[23] India's PowerGrid beats global peers in high-voltage game with the help of BHEL.[24]
World's First DC Electric Train Engine With Regenerative Braking. the concept involving the energy-efficient regeneration system was put into shape by BHEL in a 5,000 HP WAG-7 electric locomotive. The technology is meant to be an upgrade to the existing dynamic braking system used presently in the locomotives.[25]
In 2002, The Bharat Heavy Electricals has successfully developed a first-of-its-kind in the world device for improving power transfer capability and reducing transmission losses in the country's highest rating (400 kV) transmission lines. The device, called Controlled Shunt Reactor[26][27]
BHEL has commissioned the world's first ±800 kV multi-terminal HVDC project from North-East to Agra.[28]
BHEL successfully demonstrates World's first indigenous High Ash Coal Gasification Plant which converts Coal to Methanol.[29][30]
BHEL commissions 250 MW lignite power plant in Gujarat based on eco-friendly Circulating Fluidized Bed Combustion (CFBC) technology, using low grade coal (lignite) as the primary fuel.[31]
Bharat Heavy Electricals has developed a high velocity oxy fuel thermal spray process for preventing silt erosion in components of hydro turbines in hydro electric power stations. HVOF coatings were applied to turbine needles at Shanan project and to guide vanes, top cover and lower ring at Bairasiul project. It was found that the coated components showed negligible erosion.[32]
BHEL implements innovative boiler cleaning process in coal-fired thermal units.The boiler commissioning cycle will reduce from 100 days to 80 days by successfully completing the main 'Boiler Acid cleaning' without its light-up, by using an Auxiliary Boiler.[33]
BHEL with collaboration with IIT Madras developed Solid Waste Combustor, This indigenous Pilot Plant, based on a first-of-its-kind ‘Rotary Furnace’ to efficiently incinerate unsegregated Municipal Solid Waste generated in India.[34]
BHEL in JV with Coal India Limited (CIL) to develop a coal to chemicals company called Bharat Coal Gasification and Chemicals Ltd (BCGCL), BCGCL will produce chemicals from coal, including ammonia, nitric acid, syn-gas, and ammonium nitrate etc. [35]
In 2022, Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd. (BHEL) has produced a Bus Potential Transformer Module, first of its kind to be developed by an Indian manufacturer. In the existing design, a separate Potential Transformer(PT) panel was provided, having the same size, weight and cost as a regular feeder panel. Cost-savings of 57% can be achieved by the new development. In addition, panel size and weight are reduced by 80%, compared to conventional PT panels. The new PT Module for 33 kV Gas Insulated Switchgear (GIS) was successfully developed, installed and commissioned at a substation site (HVPNL, Sector – 107 Gurugram, Haryana).