In 2009, has developed a new state-of-the-art 1,200 kV class Ultra High Voltage (UHV) transformer manufacturing facility at BHEL, Bhopal in Madhya Pradesh.The new UHV transformer block has a dust free and controlled atmosphere, air conditioned bays for winding works, pressurised bay for core building and final assembly, EOT cranes for lifting loads up to 450 tonne, isostatic pressing device for windings, air cushion transport system for movement of equipment & machinery and attached UHV laboratory for testing transformers.[38]

BHEL Jhansi, is a factory and township in Uttar Pradesh, India. It was founded on 9 January 1974 and is one of the 17 manufacturing units including FSIP Jagdishpur. BHEL Jhansi started production of transformers in 1976. BHEL Jhansi has two product groups: transformers and locomotives.

Test facilities
BHEL collaborated with National High Power Test Laboratory Pvt. Ltd. (NHPTL) to test auto transformer at NHPTL facilities.[39]

BHEL to establish the India's first High Temperature Spin Test Rig for coal based thermal power plants.The efficiency enhancement of coal-based thermal power plants depends on the use of nickel-based superalloy materials as against chrome-based steels widely used now. Advanced Ultra Super Critical (AUSC) consortium selected the nickel-based Alloy 617M.[40]

Upcoming projects

BHEL has won the contract to supply 80 Vande Bharat Express
In 2019, BHEL and Libcoin are in talks to form a consortium to initially build a 1GWh lithium-ion battery plant in India.The plant's capacity will be scaled up to 30GWh in due course.[41]

In 2022, BHEL and Titagarh Wagons formed a consortium and participated in a tender by Government of India. The consortium emerged the second lowest bidder and will be supplying 80 Vande Bharat Trains at the rate of 120 crore per train to Indian Railways.[42][43] BHEL will supply propulsion system i.e. IGBT based traction converter-inverter, auxiliary converter, train control management system, motors, transformers and mechanical bogies.[44]

In 2023, Nuclear Power Corporation of India Limited (NPCIL) and Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited (BHEL) have entered into an MoU to jointly pursue business opportunities in the area of nuclear power plants based on Pressurized Heavy Water Reactor (PHWR) technology. BHEL is the company to be actively associated with all the three stages of the Indian Nuclear Programme (1st Stage PHWR, 2nd Stage FBR and 3rd Stage AHWR).[45]

In May 2023, Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited (BHEL), stated that the Indian Railways has set very ambitious targets and kept aggressive targets for upgradation.One of the significant goals set by the Indian Railways is the complete overhaul of signaling systems.As technology upgrades, BHEL will also upgrade and participate in the modernization process of the signaling system.[46]

Criticism
BHEL is selected to construct 1340-megawatt Rampal coal power plant in Rampal Upazila, Bangladesh, which is close to the Sundarbans mangrove forest. The power plant is set up by Bangladesh-India Friendship Power Company Pvt. Limited — a joint venture between NTPC Limited and Bangladesh Power Development Board.[47] The project has faced criticism for the environmental impact and the potential harm to the largest mangrove forest in the world.[48][49][50] In 2017 Norway's sovereign wealth fund removed BHEL from its investment portfolio over concerns about the Rampal coal plant.[